Documentation for transient storage (#15409)
ethereum/solidity: docs/contracts/transient-storage.rst

Reviewer: There are a few more things which should be covered for completeness:
- Transient storage variables cannot have initializers. Explain why.
    - Initialization in the constructor is allowed but (obviously) not permanent.
- You have to select the Cancun EVM to use transient storage.
- `constant` and `immutable` conflicts with `transient`.
- The address spaces for transient storage and storage are completely independent so the order of `transient` state variables does not affect layout of storage state variables and vice-versa. They do need to have distinct names though - all state variables occupy the same namespace.

Also some things that can be inferred from the fact that it works like storage should IMO be mentioned explicitly:
- Transient storage is a part of EVM state so code reading it is not `pure` and code writing it is not `view`.
- `transient` variables can have visibility. `public` ones will have a getter function automatically generated.
- Values are packed like in storage. Link to the page about the layout.
- Transient storage is directly accessible only to the contract that owns it. When performing an external call, the called contract may only read or write it indirectly, through the functions exposed by the caller - unless it's the same contract.
- Delegatecall makes your transient storage available to the contract you're delegating to.
    - With a note that it's not yet possible to have references to transient storage variables, so you cannot pass such variables into library calls. In libraries you can only access transient storage using inline assembly.
- Behavior on reverts matches storage, i.e. revert rolls it back but the caller of an external call may bypass the rollback using `try`/`catch`.

Author: I think I have added all those points to the text.

.. index:: ! transient storage, ! transient, tstore, tload

.. _transient-storage:

*****************
Transient Storage
*****************

Transient storage is another data location besides memory, storage, calldata
(and return-data and code) which was introduced alongside its respective opcodes
``TSTORE`` and ``TLOAD`` by `EIP-1153 <https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1153>`_.
This new data location behaves as a key-value store similar to storage with the main
difference being that data in transient storage is not permanent, but is scoped to
the current transaction only, after which it will be reset to zero.
The values in transient storage are never permanently saved to storage,

> thus the gas cost of operating in transient storage is much cheaper.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the content of transient storage has very limited lifetime and size,
it does not need to be stored permanently as a part of state
and the associated gas costs are much lower than in case of storage.
```

EVM version ``cancun`` or newer is required for transient storage to be available.

> Transient storage variables cannot be initialized since the value would be cleared at

Reviewer: This sounds as if you could not assign them a value at all. Maybe this would be clearer:

```suggestion
Transient storage variables cannot have an initializer since the value would be cleared at
```

the end of the creation transaction, rendering the initialization ineffective.

> ``constant`` and ``immutables`` variables conflict with transient storage, since

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``constant`` and ``immutable`` variables conflict with transient storage, since
```

It also sounds like it would fit better combined with the paragraph below.

their values are either inlined or directly stored in code.

Transient storage variables have completely independent address space from storage,
so that the order of transient state variables does not affect the layout of storage
state variables and vice-versa. They do need distinct names though because all state
variables share the same namespace.
It is also important to note that the values in transient storage are packed in the
same fashion as those in persistent storage.
See :ref:`Storage Layout <storage-inplace-encoding>` for more information.

Besides that, transient variables can have visibility as well and ``public`` ones will
have a getter function generated automatically as usual.

Note that, currently, such use of ``transient`` as a data location is only allowed for
:ref:`value type <value-types>` state variable declarations.
Reference types, such as arrays, mappings and structs, as well as local or parameter
variables are not yet supported.

An expected canonical use case for transient storage is cheaper reentrancy locks,
which can be readily implemented with the opcodes as showcased next.

.. code-block:: solidity

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0

>     pragma solidity ^0.8.27;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    pragma solidity ^0.8.28;
```

So far the EVM largely guaranteed composable behaviour, since multiple calls into a smart contract
within a complex transaction are virtually indistinguishable from multiple calls to the contract
stretched over several transactions. However, transient storage allows a violation to this principle
and incorrect use may lead to complex bugs that only surface when used across several calls.

Let's illustrate the problem with a simple example:

.. code-block:: solidity

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity ^0.8.27;

    contract MulService {
        uint transient multiplier;
        function setMultiplier(uint mul) external {
            multiplier = mul;
        }

        function multiply(uint value) external view returns (uint) {
            return value * multiplier;
        }
    }

If the example used memory or storage to store the multiplier, it would be fully composable.
It would not matter whether you split the sequence into separate transactions or grouped them in some way.
You would always get the same result. This enables use cases such as batching calls from multiple transactions

> together to reduce gas costs. Transient storage potentially breaks such use cases since composability can no longer be taken for granted.

Reviewer: You're mentioning the call sequence from the blog post, but not showing it :) I think this paragraph will be hard to understand without it.

Author: I probably chopped it our when combining the texts :)

which can be readily implemented with the opcodes as showcased next.

.. code-block:: solidity

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity ^0.8.27;

    contract Generosity {
        mapping(address => bool) sentGifts;
        bool transient locked;

        modifier nonReentrant {
            require(!locked, "Reentrancy attempt");
            locked = true;
            _;
            // Unlocks the guard, making the pattern composable.
            // After the function exits, it can be called again, even in the same transaction.
            locked = false;
        }

        function claimGift() nonReentrant public {
            require(address(this).balance >= 1 ether);
            require(!sentGifts[msg.sender]);
            (bool success, ) = msg.sender.call{value: 1 ether}("");
            require(success);

            // In a reentrant function, doing this last would open up the vulnerability
            sentGifts[msg.sender] = true;
        }
    }

Transient storage is private to the contract that owns it, in the same way as persistent storage.
Only owning contract frames may access their transient storage.

> And when they do, all the frames access the same transient store.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only owning contract frames may access their transient storage, and when they do, all the frames access the same transient store.
```

.. index:: ! transient storage, ! transient, tstore, tload

.. _transient-storage:

*****************
Transient Storage
*****************

Transient storage is another data location besides memory, storage, calldata
(and return-data and code) which was introduced alongside its respective opcodes
``TSTORE`` and ``TLOAD`` by `EIP-1153 <https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1153>`_.
This new data location behaves as a key-value store similar to storage with the main
difference being that data in transient storage is not permanent, but is scoped to
the current transaction only, after which it will be reset to zero.

> The values in transient storage are never deserialized from storage or serialized to storage,

Reviewer 3: Not sure I'd talk about "deserializing from or serializing to storage" - I'd just say since they're, well, "transient", and thus don't need to be permanently stored in state.

Reviewer: This is actually the exact wording from the EIP. At first I wanted to complain about it too, but then noticed that :) But I agree, it sounds a bit too to me too, so I'd change it.

it does not need to be stored permanently as a part of state
and the associated gas costs are much lower than in case of storage.
EVM version ``cancun`` or newer is required for transient storage to be available.

> Transient storage variables cannot have an initializer since the value would be cleared at

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Transient storage variables cannot be initialized in place since the value would be cleared at
```

Reviewer 2: I also think it would be useful to add a sentence saying that all transient state variables will be default initialized to whatever is the default for their type, and maybe link [this](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/control-structures.html#scoping-and-declarations) somewhere as well.

Author: I also added a clarification next to `initialized in place` so to make it very obvious what we refer to.

> the end of the transaction, rendering the initialization ineffective.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the end of the creation transaction, rendering the initialization ineffective.
```

There would, of course, be the option to initialize at the beginning of each call frame before the dispatch - but that may be unexpected, resp. expensive, so we also opt not to do it for now. Not sure we should elaborate on it here, though.

> For the same reason, ``constant`` and ``immutables`` conflict with transient storage.

Reviewer 3: Not sure I'd frame this as the reason - constants and immutables are just stored differently altogether (constants are inlined, immutables stored in code)

The values cannot be conserved past the end of a transaction.

Transient storage variables have completely independent address space from storage,
so that the order of transient state variables does not affect the layout of storage
state variables and vice-versa. They do need distinct names though because all state
variables share the same namespace.
It is also important to note that the values in transient storage are packed in the
same fashion as those in persistent storage.
See :ref:`Storage Layout <storage-inplace-encoding>` for more information.

Besides that, transient variables can have visibility as well and ``public`` ones will
have a getter function generated automatically as usual.

> Note that such use of ``transient`` as a data location is only allowed for
> :ref:`value type <value-types>` state variable declarations.
> Reference types, such as arrays, mappings and structs, as well as local or parameter
> variables are not supported.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that, currently, such use of ``transient`` as a data location is only allowed for
:ref:`value type <value-types>` state variable declarations.
Reference types, such as arrays, mappings and structs, as well as local or parameter
variables are not yet supported.
```

            require(address(this).balance >= 1 ether);
            require(!sentGifts[msg.sender]);
            (bool success, ) = msg.sender.call{value: 1 ether}("");
            require(success);

            // In a reentrant function, doing this last would open up the vulnerability
            sentGifts[msg.sender] = true;
        }
    }

Transient storage is private to the contract that owns it, in the same way as persistent storage.
Only owning contract frames may access their transient storage.
And when they do, all the frames access the same transient store.

Transient storage is part of the EVM state and is subject to the same mutability enforcements
as persistent storage. As such, any read access to it is not ``pure`` and writing access is not ``view``.

If the ``TSTORE`` opcode is called within the context of a ``STATICCALL``,
it will result in an exception instead of performing the modification.
``TLOAD`` is allowed within the context of a ``STATICCALL``.

When transient storage is used in the context of ``DELEGATECALL`` or ``CALLCODE``,
then the owning contract of the transient storage is the contract that issued ``DELEGATECALL``

> or ``CALLCODE`` instruction (the caller) as with persistent storage.

Reviewer 3: Do we actually have tests for this? If not, it'd be good to have them.

Reviewer: We do have some for the Yul opcode. I don't remember any for the `transient` keyword though.

then the owning contract of the transient storage is the contract that is the target

> of the ``CALL``or ``STATICCALL`` instruction (the callee).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the ``CALL`` or ``STATICCALL`` instruction (the callee).
```

of the ``CALL``or ``STATICCALL`` instruction (the callee).

.. note::
    In the case of ``DELEGATECALL``, since references to transient storage variables
    are currently not supported, it is not possible to pass those into library calls.
    In libraries, access to transient storage is only possible using inline assembly.

If a frame reverts, all writes to transient storage that took place between entry
to the frame and the return are reverted, including those that took place in inner calls.
The caller of an external call may bypass that mechanism using a ``try ... catch`` block.

> This mimics the behavior of persistent storage.

Reviewer 3: This could be phrased more clearly - ``try ... catch`` only prevent reverts bubbling up from inner call frames.
And "mimicking the behavior of persistent storage" sounds rather misleading IMO (as if this would make transient storage persistent somehow)

.. note::
    Currently, the compiler can parse ``transient`` as a data location, however it is not
    defined as a keyword of the language yet. This means that the use of ``transient``

>     is backwards-compatible and does not break previous code that eventually used it as an identifier.

Reviewer 3: I'd just drop that, it's more of an implementation detail than relevant information - or, if we want to keep it, I'd make it clear that it'll change with the next breaking release.

in order to preserve the composability of your smart contract,
utmost care is recommended for more advanced use cases of transient storage.

> For smart contracts, composability is a very important design to achieve a self-contained behaviour,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For smart contracts, composability is a very important design principle to achieve self-contained behaviour,
```

such that multiple calls into individual smart contracts can be composed to more complex applications.
So far the EVM largely guaranteed composable behaviour, since multiple calls into a smart contract
within a complex transaction are virtually indistinguishable from multiple calls to the contract

> stretched over several transactions. However, transient storage allows a violation to this principle

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
stretched over several transactions. However, transient storage allows a violation of this principle,
```

and incorrect use may lead to complex bugs that only surface when used across several calls.

Let's illustrate the problem with a simple example:

.. code-block:: solidity

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity ^0.8.28;

    contract MulService {
        uint transient multiplier;
        function setMultiplier(uint mul) external {
            multiplier = mul;
        }

        function multiply(uint value) external view returns (uint) {
            return value * multiplier;
        }
    }

and  a sequence of external calls:

.. code-block:: solidity

    setMultiplier(42);
    multiply(1);
    multiply(2);

> If the example used memory or storage to store the multiplier, it would be fully composable.

Reviewer 2: Add a short sentence describing the composable vs non-composable results of the above sequence; i.e. that if the calls above are run in sequence where each call is made in a subsequent (different) frame, that the `multiplier` state variable will simply be reset to zero after we leave the first call to `setMultiplier(42)`, which will thus cause the subsequent calls to `multiply(1)` and `multiply(2)` to return zero. 

If the calls are however to be made in the same frame (e.g. as inner calls of a function), then the results would yield the expected 42 and a 84.

```solidity
contract C {
	uint transient multiplier;

	function setMultiplier(uint _multiplier) public {
		multiplier = _multiplier;
	}

	function multiplyBy(uint _multiplicand) public view returns (uint) {
		return _multiplicand * multiplier;
	}

	function sequenceInFrame() external returns (uint, uint) {
		setMultiplier(42);
		return (multiplyBy(1), multiplyBy(2));
	}
}
// ====
// EVMVersion: >=cancun
// ----
// sequenceInFrame() -> 42, 84
// setMultiplier(uint256): 42 ->
// multiplyBy(uint256): 1 -> 0
// multiplyBy(uint256): 2 -> 0
```

Author: Done.

together to reduce gas costs. Transient storage potentially breaks such use cases since composability can no longer be taken for granted.

Note however, that the lack of composability is not an inherent property of transient storage.
It could have been preserved if the rules for resetting its content were slightly adjusted.
Currently the clearing happens for all contracts at the same time, when the transaction ends.
If instead it was cleared for a contract as soon as no function belonging to it remained active
on the call stack (which could mean multiple resets per transaction), the issue would disappear.
In the example above it would mean clearing transient storage after each of the calls.

> 

Reviewer 3: I'd drop this - little reason to dwell on it, it works how it's specified now - our docs are not the place to argue that things could have been different.

> .. index:: ! transient storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. index:: ! transient storage, ! transient, tstore, tload
```

.. _transient-storage:

*****************
Transient Storage
*****************

Transient storage is another data location besides memory, storage, calldata
(and return-data and code) which was introduced alongside its respective opcodes
``TSTORE`` and ``TLOAD`` by `EIP-1153 <https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1153>`_.
This new data location behaves as a key-value store similar to storage with the main
difference being that data in transient storage is not permanent, but is scoped to

> the current transaction only, after which it will be reset to zero. The values on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the current transaction only, after which it will be reset to zero. The values in
```

Reviewer: By the way, I'd really encourage the style of starting each sentence on a new line (and breaking long sentences at the width of 100 chars, in line with our general line length). It's sometimes awkward to introduce this into existing text, but we should always do this when adding an entirely new page, like here.

This is much nicer to maintain since you don't have to rewrap the whole paragraph every time you change something in the middle. And the diff is smaller. It's also easier to comment on specific sentences in a PR.

Reviewer: Looks like a lot of the newly added text is still not following that. Would be good to correct that before we merge.

transient storage are never deserialized from storage or serialized to storage,
thus the gas cost of operating in transient storage is much cheaper,
since it doesn't require disk access.

Currently, the compiler can parse ``transient`` as a data location, however it is not
defined as a keyword of the language yet. This means that the use of ``transient``

> is backwards-compatible and does not break previous code that eventually used it as an identifier.

Reviewer: This is just a small technical detail. I'd put it in a note later in the text - it should be less prominent.

Note however that such use of ``transient`` as a data location is only allowed for
:ref:`value type <value-types>` state variable declarations. Further support for

> other types as well as code generation is intended with upcoming releases.

Reviewer: I'd remove any promises from this. This is our plan, but it does not necessarily have to be encoded in the docs. We already said that in release notes and IMO that was a better place for a statement of this kind.

I'd instead just plainly describe what isn't supported: reference types, mappings, references to transient storage, locals, parameters, etc.

which can be readily implemented with the opcodes as showcased next.

.. code-block:: solidity

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity ^0.8.27;

    contract Generosity {
        mapping(address => bool) sentGifts;
        bool transient locked;

        modifier nonReentrant {
            require(!locked, "Reentrancy attempt");
            locked = true;
            _;
            // Unlocks the guard, making the pattern composable.
            // After the function exits, it can be called again, even in the same transaction.
            locked = false;
        }

        function claimGift() nonReentrant public {
            require(address(this).balance >= 1 ether);
            require(!sentGifts[msg.sender]);
            (bool success, ) = msg.sender.call{value: 1 ether}("");
            require(success);

            // In a reentrant function, doing this last would open up the vulnerability
            sentGifts[msg.sender] = true;
        }
    }

.. note::
    Given the caveats mentioned in the specification of EIP-1153, utmost care is
    recommended for more advanced use cases of transient storage to preserve

>     the composability of your smart contract.

Reviewer: I think this is still not detailed enough. Listing those caveats is very important. The note at the very least should directly link to the [Security Considerations in the EIP](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1153#security-considerations) because otherwise very few people will go out of their way to look it up.

I'd go as far as to directly quote the relevant bits from that section in our docs:

> Smart contract developers should understand the lifetime of transient storage variables before use. Because transient storage is automatically cleared at the end of the transaction, smart contract developers may be tempted to avoid clearing slots as part of a call in order to save gas. However, this could prevent further interactions with the contract in the same transaction (e.g. in the case of re-entrancy locks) or cause other bugs, so smart contract developers should be careful to only leave transient storage slots with nonzero values when those slots are intended to be used by future calls within the same transaction. Otherwise, these opcodes behave exactly the same as `SSTORE` and `SLOAD`, so all the usual security considerations apply especially in regard to reentrancy risk.
>
> Smart contract developers may also be tempted to use transient storage as an alternative to in-memory mappings. They should be aware that transient storage is not discarded when a call returns or reverts, as is memory, and should prefer memory for these use cases so as not to create unexpected behavior on reentrancy in the same transaction. The necessarily high cost of transient storage over memory should already discourage this usage pattern. Most usages of in-memory mappings can be better implemented with key-sorted lists of entries, and in-memory mappings are rarely required in smart contracts (i.e. the author knows of no known use cases in production).

It would also be good to have examples, but we already have some in the blog post so maybe it's enough to link to that post here.

Author: I had copied and adapted the text and an example from our blog post. I think they are equivalent.
I included a phrase in the end pointing to the Security Considerations section of EIP-1153.
What do you think?
